bold gentle introduction (#1105)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/bold/bold-gentle-introduction.md

Under the hood, the reason why BOLD can offer time-bound, permissionless validation is because a correct Arbitrum state assertion is **not tied to a single staker or entity**. Instead, because L2 states are completely deterministic and can eventually be proven on Ethereum, any party can stake on this correct, deterministic state and, through interactive fraud proofs, can prove that their claim is correct. This means that a single honest party staking on the correct state assertion will always win, guaranteed. 

To summarize with an analogy: Arbitrum’s current dispute protocol assumes that any assertion that gets challenged must be defended against each unique challenger sequentially, like in a *“1v1 tournament”*. BOLD, on the other hand, enables any single honest party to defend the correct state and be guaranteed to win, similar to an *“all-vs-all battle royale”* where there must and will always be a single winner in the end.

> ## TODO INSERT GRAPHIC #1 HERE 

Author: Yup, acknowledging

BOLD enables permissionless validation by allowing *anyone* to challenge incorrect Arbitrum state assertions and therefore unlocks new avenues for participation in securing the network, fostering greater inclusivity and resilience. This is made possible because BOLD guarantees that a single, honest entity staked on the correct Arbitrum state assertion will always win against malicious adversaries. The research and work to bring BOLD to life underscores Arbitrum's commitment to scaling Ethereum without compromising on security. 

![pie-slice](./assets/l2beat-pie-chart.png)

> With BOLD at its core, Arbitrum charts a course towards being recognized as a Stage 2 rollup by addressing the currently yellow (above) State Validation wedge in [L2Beat's risk analysis pie chart](https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary). BOLD contributes to a more decentralized, efficient, and robust rollup ecosystem while cementing the Arbitrum stack as the most mature and advanced rollup technology out there. And if that’s not amazing enough, L2 Orbit chains launched with BOLD will have permissionless validation available for them right-out-the-box simply by upgrading their Nitro node software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With BOLD at its core, Arbitrum charts a course towards being recognized as a Stage 2 rollup by addressing the currently yellow (above) State Validation wedge in [L2Beat's risk analysis pie chart](https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary). BOLD contributes to a more decentralized, efficient, and robust rollup ecosystem. Additionally, L2 Orbit chains launched with BOLD will have permissionless validation available for them out of the box by upgrading their Nitro node software.
```

> L2 Orbit chains launched with BOLD will have permissionless validation available for them out of the box by upgrading their Nitro node software.

It may be worth addressing two audiences specifically here, assuming my understanding is correct: Current Orbit chain operators (who can enable BOLD by upgrading Nitro), and future Orbit chain operators (who will have BOLD enabled by default by way of Nitro). Right now we're combining these two.

Not sure if we want to address whether this BOLD-enabled-by-default Nitro upgrade will be required, or the impact it will have on chain operators (could it be argued that this is a breaking change, or is it a completely unobtrusive 'pure win' from RaaS providers' perspective).

Author: Thanks - great call out. Will address in a separate commit!

user_story: 'As a user or researcher of the Arbitrum product suite, I want to learn about BOLD, a next-generation dispute protocol that enables permissionless validation.'
content_type: gentle-introduction
author: leeederek
sme: leeederek
---

import PublicPreviewBannerPartial from './partials/_bold-public-preview-banner-partial.md';

<PublicPreviewBannerPartial />

This introduction is for those who want to learn about BOLD: a new dispute protocol for Optimistic Rollups that can enable **permissionless validation for Arbitrum chains**. BOLD stands for Bounded Liquidity Delay and is currently deployed on a public testnet for anyone to join and test how challenges will work. 

This next-generation dispute protocol technology will soon be available for any Arbitrum chain, and pending a governance vote, will eventually be made available on Arbitrum Sepolia, Arbitrum One, and Arbitrum Nova.

BOLD will eventually replace the current, permissioned fraud proof mechanism that powers Arbitrum chains today.

## In a nutshell:

> - BOLD, an acronym for Bounded Liquidity Delay, is a new challenge protocol for Arbitrum chains that ensures disputes will take, at most, 1 challenge period (6.4 days) to get resolved. BOLD effectively eliminates delay attacks by enforcing a upper time-bound for dispute resolution.

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention that the upper time-bound enforced for resolving disputes is added to the current challenge period (e.g., if 3 days have passed since the assertion was posted, and someone initiates a challenge, the full confirmation period will be 10 days)

Reading the text I assumed that I can withdraw my funds after 1 challenge period regardless of whether or not disputes arise, and that's not the case, and that might be a bit confusing.

> - Validation for Arbitrum One and Nova is currently is limited to a [permissioned set of parties maintained by the Arbitrum DAO](https://docs.arbitrum.foundation/state-of-progressive-decentralization#allowlisted-validators) to reduce the risks of *[delay attacks](https://medium.com/offchainlabs/solutions-to-delay-attacks-on-rollups-434f9d05a07a)* where malicious entities can indefinitely open disputes and delay confirmations of assertions about Arbitrum states.

Reviewer 2: Should we also link to the description of the rollup protocol for some extra context?
https://arbitrum-docs-git-derek-bold-gentle-intro-docs-offchain-labs.vercel.app/inside-arbitrum-nitro/#arbitrum-rollup-protocol

- However, BOLD mitigates the risks for delay attacks and therefore paves the way for permissionless validation of Arbitrum chains. Permissionless validation is a key milestone on [Arbitrum’s journey to becoming a Stage 2 Rollup](https://docs.arbitrum.foundation/state-of-progressive-decentralization) - the most advanced and mature rollup technology categorization. With BOLD, **any honest party can stake on the correct L2 state and will always win disputes against malicious entities.**

> - BOLD is currently considered to be in `alpha` release and is deployed on a public testnet. [Follow this guide](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold-validator-starter-kit) to deploy a BOLD validator to test & explore, first hand, how BOLD works to secure Arbitrum chains. To learn more about BOLD, please check out the [BOLD whitepaper](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold/blob/main/docs/research-specs/BOLDChallengeProtocol.pdf) and [BOLD's code and specifications on Github](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- BOLD is currently considered to be in `alpha` release and is deployed on a public testnet. [Follow this guide](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold-validator-starter-kit) to deploy a BOLD validator to test and explore, first hand, how BOLD works to secure Arbitrum chains. To learn more about BOLD, please check out the [BOLD whitepaper](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold/blob/main/docs/research-specs/BOLDChallengeProtocol.pdf) and [BOLD's code and specifications on Github](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/bold).
```

[Style convention 10](https://docs.arbitrum.io/for-devs/contribute#style-conventions)

Reviewer 2: '&' is also used in other parts of the document, can you update all occurrences? 🙏

## What _exactly_ is BOLD?

> BOLD, an acronym for Bounded Liquidity Delay Protocol, is a set of rules used by validators to open and resolve disputes about Arbitrum’s state to ensure only valid states get confirmed to an Arbitrum chain’s data availability layer, such as Ethereum, for example. BOLD is shipped as part of the Nitro tech stack - the software that powers every Arbitrum validator node. 

Reviewer 2: I don't think the states are confirmed to the chain's DA layer (or at least, I believe DAs are not used that way right now, if I'm not mistaken).

I'd say they are confirmed to the chain's base layer, which acts as the security layer, but maybe someone else from the Product team has a better wording for it.

> In short, BOLD secures the process of withdrawing assets from Arbitrum back to Ethereum.

Reviewer 2: Should we use another wording for this?
"secures the process of withdrawing assets" might imply that it was not secure before BOLD, but that's not the case. We are just decentralizing the ability to participate in the validation of the state of the chain.

A BOLD-enabled validator’s responsibilities are to:

- Post claims about an Arbitrum chain’s state to Ethereum,
- Challenge invalid claims made by other validators, and
- Confirm valid claims - either by timing other validators out or by winning a challenge

> The goal of BOLD is ensure the maximum challenge period is 6.4 days, effectively removing the risk of delay attacks and making L2 to L1 withdrawals more secure. BOLD accomplishes this by introducing a new dispute system that lets a single entity secure Arbitrum against malicious parties - effectively allowing anyone to validate Arbitrum’s state without needing permission to do so.

Reviewer 2: Here too, the maximum challenge period is 2*6.4

Reviewer 2: Also, we might want to change the "L2 to L1" wording to something like "withdrawals to the parent chain", since this will also be applied to Orbit chains.

Is a bit tricky, since we clearly want to emphasize the fact that Arbitrum chains are one of the main beneficiaries of this update, but we probably want to make sure Orbit chains are also benefited from this.

Another thing we could do is to add a note at the end or the beginning of the page stating that although "L2 to L1" language is used, this also applies to any chain settling to a parent chain.

Reviewer 2: Finally, "a new dispute system that lets a single entity secure Arbitrum", this is the case with the current challenge protocol too, is not something new with Bold. Is one of the main selling points of the current challenge protocol, so I think we shouldn't mention it as a feature of Bold.

## Why does Arbitrum need a new dispute protocol?

> While Arbitrum chains today have working fraud proofs to secure withdrawals, BOLD introduces a few subtle but innovative changes that let *anyone* challenge and win disputes - all within a fixed time period. In other words, Arbitrum chains will continue to be secured with an interactive proving game between validators, but with the added benefit of this game being completely permissionless and time-bounded to 1 challenge period (currently set at 6.4 days).

Reviewer 2: Here too, it would be time-bounded to 2 challenge periods.

> Under the hood, the reason why BOLD can offer time-bound, permissionless validation is because a correct Arbitrum state assertion is **not tied to a single staker or entity**. Instead, because L2 states are completely deterministic and can eventually be proven on Ethereum, any party can stake on this correct, deterministic state and, through interactive fraud proofs, can prove that their claim is correct. This means that a single honest party staking on the correct state assertion will always win, guaranteed. 

Reviewer 2: "Instead, because L2 states are completely deterministic and can eventually be proven on Ethereum, any party can stake on this correct, deterministic state and, through interactive fraud proofs, can prove that their claim is correct. This means that a single honest party staking on the correct state assertion will always win, guaranteed."

This is also the case with the current challenge protocol, not a feature from Bold.

To summarize with an analogy and the diagram below: Arbitrum’s current dispute protocol assumes that any assertion that gets challenged must be defended against each unique challenger sequentially, like in a *“1v1 tournament”*. BOLD, on the other hand, enables any single honest party to defend the correct state and be guaranteed to win, similar to an *“all-vs-all battle royale”* where there must and will always be a single winner in the end.

![before-and-after-with-bold](./assets/before-vs-after-with-bold.png)
*Note that the timer/clocks above are arbitrary and instead represent the duration of challenges and how challenges are sequential today but can take place in parallel with BOLD. The duration of challenges are independent from one another.*

### BOLD makes withdrawals to L1 Ethereum safer

> Today, the rollup protocol for Arbitrum chains works by posting both transaction data & the resulting state from those transactions to a data availability layer, like Ethereum. Then, there is a period of time called the “challenge period” where any validator can open a dispute on a given state - this is what makes Arbitrum an optimistic rollup. This challenge period is why you must wait ~1 week (6.4 days to be exact) to withdraw assets from Arbitrum One, for example. 

Reviewer 2: "posting both transaction data & the resulting state from those transactions to a data availability layer"

Same reasoning as before. I'm not 100% sure now, but I would say that the DA only stores transaction data.

Can you verify?

While this is quite secure, this design is susceptible to [delay attacks](https://medium.com/offchainlabs/solutions-to-delay-attacks-on-rollups-434f9d05a07a), where malicious actors continuously open disputes to extend that challenge period for as long as they’re willing to sacrifice stakes - effectively extending the challenge period indefinitely. This risk is not ideal nor safe and is why validation for Arbitrum One and Nova is confined to a permissioned set of entities overseen by the Arbitrum DAO.

![bold-safer-withdrawals](./assets/safer-withdrawals-with-bold.png)

> BOLD addresses these challenges head-on by introducing a time limit on the existing rollup protocol for resolving disputes, effectively ensuring that challenges conclude within a 7-day window (this window can be decreased by the DAO). This is possible due to two reasons: (1) BOLD’s design allows for challenges between the honest party and any number of malicious adversaries to happen in parallel, and (2) the use of a time limit that will automatically confirm the honest party’s claims if the challenger fails to respond.

Reviewer 2: "(this window can be decreased by the DAO)"

Is this something we want to mention here?

BOLD enables permissionless validation by allowing *anyone* to challenge incorrect Arbitrum state assertions and therefore unlocks new avenues for participation in securing the network, fostering greater inclusivity and resilience. This is made possible because BOLD guarantees that a single, honest entity staked on the correct Arbitrum state assertion will always win against malicious adversaries. The research and work to bring BOLD to life underscores Arbitrum's commitment to scaling Ethereum without compromising on security. 

![pie-slice](./assets/l2beat-pie-chart.png)

With BOLD at its core, Arbitrum charts a course towards being recognized as a Stage 2 rollup by addressing the currently yellow (above) State Validation wedge in [L2Beat's risk analysis pie chart](https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary). BOLD contributes to a more decentralized, efficient, and robust rollup ecosystem. Additionally, BOLD will be available as an upgrade to all Orbit chains who wish to adopt it to reap the aforementioned benefits.

### How is this possible?

> The BOLD protocol provides the guardrails and rules for how validators produce, validate, and challenge claims about the state of an Arbitrum chain. Since Arbitrum’s state is deterministic, there will always be only 1 correct state for a given input of on-chain operations and transactions. The beauty of BOLD’s design is centered around this very fact: that there is only 1 correct state on Arbitrum and therefore anyone defending that correct state will always prevail.

Reviewer 2: This is all the case with the current challenge protocol, not new with Bold.

Using this text, I'd say that "The BOLD protocol provides the guardrails and rules for how validators challenge claims about the state of an Arbitrum chain" . But the rest of the paragraph is the behavior of the current challenge protocol.

Let’s dive in to an overview of how BOLD actually works.

> 1. **An assertion is made:** Validators begin by taking the most recent confirmed L2 block, called `Block A`, and assert that some number of transactions afterwards, using Nitro’s deterministic State Transition Function (STF), will result in an end state, `Block Z`. If a validator claims that the end state represented by `Block Z` is correct, they will stake on `Block Z` and propose that state to be posted to Ethereum. If nobody disagrees after a certain amount of time, known as the challenge period, then the state represented by the L2 `Block Z` is confirmed as the correct state of an Arbitrum chain. However, if someone disagrees with the end state `Block Z`, they can submit a challenge. This is where BOLD comes in to play.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't work exactly like this. There's general some misconception around what are the differences between L2 blocks and Rollup blocks (or RBlocks). There's always been that misconception though 😄 

In the challenge protocol, RBlocks are used, which are unrelated to L2 blocks. There's more info in [this FAQ](https://docs.arbitrum.io/learn-more/faq#what-is-the-difference-between-an-l2-block-and-a-rblock) and [this page](https://docs.arbitrum.io/inside-arbitrum-nitro/#arbitrum-rollup-protocol)

> 2. **A challenge is opened:** When another validator observes and disagrees with the end state represented by `Block Z`, they can permissionlessly open a challenge by asserting and staking a claim on a different end state, represented by an L2 `Block Y`. At this point in time, there are now 2 asserted states: `Block A → Block Z` and `Block A → Block Y`. This pair of asserted states is called *an edge* while a Merkle tree of asserted states from some start to end point (e.g. `Block A → Block Z`) is more formally known as a *history commitment.* It is important to note that Ethereum at this point in time has no notion of which edges are correct or incorrect - edges are simply a portion of a claim about the history of the chain from some end state all the way back to some initial state.

Reviewer 2: I would confirm the definition of "edge" given here. This is Bold specific and I'm not completely sure of the right definition.

    2. **Big-step challenges:** now that the parties have narrowed down their dispute to a single block, that we call `Block B`, the back-and-forth bisection exercise continues within that block. Note that `Block B` is claimed by all parties to be some state after the initial state `Block A` but before the final states `Block Z` and `Block Y`. This time however, the parties will narrow down on a specific *range* of instructions for the state transition function within the block - essentially working towards identifying a set of instructions that their disagreement lies within. This range is currently defined to be 2^20 steps of WASM instructions, which is the assembly of choice for validating Arbitrum chains.
    3. **One-step challenge:** within that range of 2^20 instructions, the back and forth bisecting continues until all parties arrive at a single step of instruction that they disagree on. At this point in time, parties agree on the initial state of Arbitrum before the step but disagree on the end state 1 step immediately after. Remember that since Arbitrum’s state is entirely deterministic, there is only 1 correct end state.

> 4. **One-step proof:** Once a challenge is isolated to a dispute about a single step, the honest party's edge can be proven correct with a *one-step proof*. A one-step proof is, in theory, a proof that a single step of computation results in a particular state. The honest party will submit such a proof, whose correctness is easily and quickly validated via execution on Ethereum. The honest edge will thus be confirmed, and the dishonest one rejected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **One-step proof:** Once a challenge is isolated to a dispute about a single step, the honest party's edge can be proven correct with a *one-step proof*. A one-step proof is a proof that a single step of computation results in a particular state. The honest party will submit such a proof, whose correctness is easily and quickly validated via execution on Ethereum. The honest edge will thus be confirmed, and the dishonest one rejected.
```

And also, the disputed single step is actually executed on Ethereum, rather than submitted by the honest party. I.e., both parties have submitted what they think is the resulting state after executing that step, and that step is executed by the OneStepProof smart contract on Ethereum (or the parent chain), to be completely unbiased/objective.

Author: makes sense, how does this sound?

> Once a challenge is isolated down to a dispute about a single step, both parties run that step to produce, and then submit, a *one-step proof* to the `OneStepProof` smart contract on the parent chain (e.g. Ethereum). A one-step proof is a proof that a single step of computation results in a particular state. The smart contract on the parent chain will execute the disputed step to validate the correctness of a submitted proof from the two parties. It is at this point that the honest party's proof will be deemed valid and it's tree of edges will get confirmed, while the dishonest party has their edges rejected.

Reviewer 2: Sounds much better, but I think we should have someone else's take on it too, since I'm not sure about the "proof submission" part. I have limited knowledge about this, but in my mind, only initialState and instructionToExecute are sent to the smart contract, and the sc returns the actual state that results from that operation, which will make the honest party win the challenge.

**Are there any incentives to run a BOLD validator to secure Arbitrum chains?**

- Running a BOLD validator secures their respective Arbitrum chain and protects the assets on the chain from malicious actors - all you need is 1 honest party. Other than this critical piece, there are currently no financial incentives for parties to run a BOLD validator. Any future decisions or changes to this design can be proposed to and voted on by the Arbitrum DAO.

**What type of hardware will be necessary to run a BOLD validator?**

- The type of hardware required for running a BOLD validator is still being researched and finalized. The goal, however, is that regular consumer hardware (i.e. laptop) can effectively be used by an honest party to secure an Arbitrum chain using BOLD in the average case.

**Is it possible that a high volume of disputes overwhelms the honest party?**

> - Yes - while BOLD is specifically designed to manage and resolve concurrent challenges between any number of parties, there is a chance that the high volume of challenges going on at the same time overwhelms the honest party. To mitigate this risk, the cost of opening a challenge will scale with the number of open challenges so as to make it unfeasible for a malicious party to perform a DoS attack on an Arbitrum chain, and well-resourced honest parties will be able to respond to this number of malicious claims.

Reviewer 2: This is more a marketing issue, but as a user I would feel more secure without the first "Yes", and reading only the rest of the text.
